Add Generative AI: OpenSearch's journey as an open-source search engine blog (#3716)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-03-24-opensearch-generative-ai.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Generative AI: OpenSearch's journey as an open-source search engine" 
authors:
  - pallp

> date: 2025-03-24

Reviewer: Publish date: 2025-03-26

Reviewer 2: @pajuric Done

> date: 2025-03-24

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2025-03-26
```

categories:
  - community

> meta_keywords: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
meta_keywords: OpenSearch, generative AI, vector search, vector database, semantic search, RAG workflows, Linux Foundation, open source, AI search, ML Commons, LLM integration, Flow Framework
```

> meta_description: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
meta_description: Explore OpenSearch's transformation into an AI-powered search platform, from its Linux Foundation transition to implementing vector search, RAG workflows, and multimodal capabilities.
```

> ---

Reviewer: Please update the meta with the following: 

_meta_keywords:_ OpenSearch, generative AI, vector search, vector database, semantic search, RAG workflows, Linux Foundation, open source, AI search, ML Commons, LLM integration, Flow Framework

_meta_description:_ Explore OpenSearch's transformation into an AI-powered search platform, from its Linux Foundation transition to implementing vector search, RAG workflows, and multimodal capabilities.

Reviewer 2: @pajuric Done

[Recent performance improvements](https://opensearch.org/blog/opensearch-performance-2.17/) have focused on reducing latency for text and vector querying, improving ingestion and indexing throughput, and enhancing storage efficiency. The [latest OpenSearch release](https://opensearch.org/blog/explore-OpenSearch-2-19/) exemplifies the community's commitment, delivering improvements in query speed, resource utilization, and memory efficiency across text queries, aggregations, range queries, and time-series analytics. These enhancements ensure that even as OpenSearch integrates AI-driven techniques, its core keyword search capabilities remain robust and performant.

## The transition to generative-AI-powered search

Two pivotal events shaped OpenSearch's trajectory as a search engine: the generative AI revolution that began in 2022 and gained momentum in 2023, and OpenSearch's transition to the Linux Foundation in 2024, advancing a community-led innovation model. These milestones catalyzed OpenSearch's transformation from a text-based search engine into an AI-driven platform.

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 26: The text I deleted doesn't substantially add value and introduces too many "and" phrases.

## Hybrid search and multimodal capabilities

As AI-powered search advances, OpenSearch has embraced hybrid search, combining the precision of lexical search with the intelligence of semantic search. This means that users no longer have to rely solely on keyword matches; instead, OpenSearch can understand the intent behind a user's query and return more relevant and intelligent results. Beyond hybrid search, OpenSearch has introduced multimodal search, enabling searches across text, images, audio, and video. This advancement is particularly valuable for media organizations, e-commerce platforms, and enterprise applications, where diverse data types must be searchable in a unified manner. 

## Sparse models for democratizing AI-powered search

One of OpenSearch's key contributions to the open-source AI community is its adoption of sparse models. Unlike dense embeddings, which require substantial computational resources, sparse models are lightweight deep learning techniques that make AI-powered search accessible to organizations of all sizes.

> This approach ensures that AI-driven search capabilities are not limited to companies with deep financial resources, furthering OpenSearch's mission of democratizing access to advanced search technologies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach ensures that AI-driven search capabilities are not exclusive to companies with deep financial resources, furthering OpenSearch's mission of democratizing access to advanced search technologies.
```

## LLM integrations and ML Commons

> Generative AI's true power lies in its ability to enhance search relevance. OpenSearch provides seamless integration with LLMs, offering out-of-the-box connectors for Cohere, OpenAI, and DeepSeek. Through ML Commons, an open-source machine learning library within OpenSearch, developers can easily integrate AI models and leverage community-driven blueprints to build powerful AI applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generative AI's true power lies in its ability to enhance search relevance. OpenSearch provides seamless integration with LLMs, offering out-of-the-box connectors for Cohere, OpenAI, and DeepSeek. Through ML Commons, an open-source machine learning (ML) library within OpenSearch, developers can easily integrate AI models and leverage community-driven blueprints to build powerful AI applications.
```

> ML Commons allows you to bring their own machine learning models and flexibly integrate various model formats and runtimes for seamless inference within OpenSearch---a testament to OpenSearch's agility is its ability to quickly adapt to new AI models. For example, when DeepSeek launched, OpenSearch contributors were able to roll out a connector within just two days, thanks to the platform's flexible ML Commons framework and strong community collaboration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ML Commons allows you to use your own ML models and flexibly integrate various model formats and runtimes for seamless inference within OpenSearch---a testament to OpenSearch's agility is its ability to quickly adapt to new AI models. For example, when DeepSeek launched, OpenSearch contributors were able to release a connector within just two days, thanks to the platform's flexible ML Commons framework and strong community collaboration.
```

## Simplifying RAG and conversational search

> While AI-powered search offers unprecedented capabilities, implementing RAG workflows remains complex. RAG involves retrieving relevant context from a search engine and using it to generate responses with an LLM. OpenSearch aims to simplify this process with the Flow Framework, a no-code/low-code builder that provides an intuitive drag-and-drop interface for constructing AI-powered search workflows.

Reviewer 2: Second sentence: "RAG involves using an LLM to generate responses based on relevant context retrieved from a search engine"?

> While AI-powered search offers unprecedented capabilities, implementing RAG workflows remains complex. RAG involves retrieving relevant context from a search engine and using it to generate responses with an LLM. OpenSearch aims to simplify this process with the Flow Framework, a no-code/low-code builder that provides an intuitive drag-and-drop interface for constructing AI-powered search workflows.

Author: ```suggestion
While AI-powered search offers unprecedented capabilities, implementing RAG workflows remains complex. RAG involves using an LLM to generate responses based on relevant context retrieved from a search engine. OpenSearch aims to simplify this process with the Flow Framework, a no-code/low-code builder that provides an intuitive drag-and-drop interface for constructing AI-powered search workflows.
```

> Additionally, OpenSearch is enhancing conversational search, allowing users to interact with search results in a natural, chat-like manner. Through contributions from Aryn.ai, the platform is evolving beyond static search queries, making search experiences more interactive and intuitive. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, OpenSearch is enhancing conversational search, allowing users to interact with search results in a natural, chat-based manner. Through contributions from Aryn.ai, the platform is evolving beyond static search queries, making search experiences more interactive and intuitive. 
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 58: Rather than being "chat-like", the interaction is literally "chat-based".

## Open-Source innovation and the future of OpenSearch

OpenSearch's transformation into an AI-powered search engine has been made possible by community-led innovation. The open-source community continues to shape the project's future by contributing features, enhancements, and integrations that push the boundaries of what AI-powered search can achieve.

> As OpenSearch moves forward, it remains committed to several key strategic objectives:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As OpenSearch moves forward on its journey, it remains committed to several key strategic objectives:
```

- Enhancing vector database scalability
- Improving the performance of the core search engine
- Expanding LLM and AI model integrations
- Improving hybrid and multimodal search capabilities
- Democratizing AI search through lightweight sparse models

## Join the OpenSearch community

The strength of OpenSearch lies in its open-source contributors. Whether you're an AI researcher, developer, or search enthusiast, there are many ways to get involved and make a meaningful impact:

> * Join the [OpenSearch Slack](https://opensearch.org/slack.html) to engage with the community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Join the [OpenSearch Slack channel](https://opensearch.org/slack.html) to engage with the community.
```

> * Contribute code or submit proposals in [GitHub](https://github.com/opensearch-project/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Contribute code or submit proposals on [GitHub](https://github.com/opensearch-project/).
```

* [Explore ML Commons](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tutorials/) and help build AI-powered search applications.
* Attend [OpenSearch events and hackathons](https://opensearch.org/events) to collaborate with experts.

> * Learn from the new [Vector Database tutorials](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tutorials/vector-search/index/) to deepen your understanding of AI search technologies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Learn from the new [vector database tutorials](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tutorials/vector-search/index/) to deepen your understanding of AI search technologies.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 80: Fine as is if we used "vector database tutorials" intentionally here, but "vector search tutorials" would reflect the actual title of the page: "Vector search tutorials".

> **The future of search is open, intelligent, and AI-driven**---and OpenSearch invites you to be part of building it. Join us in shaping the next generation of open-source search technology.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**The future of search is open, intelligent, and AI driven**---and OpenSearch invites you to be part of building it. Join us in shaping the next generation of open-source search technology!
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I deleted line 84 because it's essentially a duplicate of the preceding sentence (but not as well phrased).

> Let's build the future of search together in an open-source way!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
